---
layout: post
author: Paige Kirby
title: "Register today for 'Space to Innovate'"
excerpt: Next week, join Development Gateway and the Young Transatlantic Network of the GMF for an evening with entrepreneurs and thought-leaders ...
thumbnail: assets/post-thumbnails/worldtopocloseup.jpg
thumbnail-alt: 'Atlantic Topography'
---

Technology is making the world smaller. Technology and big data are changing the way governments, organizations, and individuals interact with each other – offering both opportunities and challenges for 21st century leadership. Innovative processes, methods, and products – from smart apps, to cloud-based platforms, to social networking sites – help facilitate dialogue and share best practices.

Sustained, inclusive communication is important to promoting a prosperous transatlantic community. Technology can serve as a driver of change, fostering dialogue and leading to cooperative solutions. Ensuring these discussions bridge the gap between local operators and government policymakers can help fuel more resilient communities on both sides of the Atlantic.

**[Next week, join Development Gateway and the Young Transatlantic Network of the German Marshall Fund of the United States (GMF) at the OpenGov Hub for an evening with entrepreneurs and thought-leaders about how digital tools and innovative policies can create more efficient, integrated, and sustainable transatlantic communities for the 21st century.](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/space-to-innovate-how-technology-facilitates-transatlantic-cooperation-tickets-17726138357)** Audience participation will be encouraged, and light hors d'oeuvres will be served.

Speakers:
-Lovisa Williams, Global Digital Strategist, U.S. Department of State 
-Aaron Sherinian, Chief Communications and Marketing Officer, UN Foundation
-Nancy McGuire Choi, Co-Executive Director, AidData and Senior Director of Operations, Development Gateway

Moderator: Richard Lui, Anchor, MSNBC 

[Register today.](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/space-to-innovate-how-technology-facilitates-transatlantic-cooperation-tickets-17726138357)

**Lovisa Williams** is the deputy director for the U.S. Department of State’s International Information Programs Bureau’s Office of Innovative Engagement, as well as the Department’s social media strategist. She is the co-author of the Department’s first social media use policy and founder and manager of the Department’s Community Managers Group. Williams developed the first Community Managers Boot Camp and continues to teach Department employees how to be community managers. She is a regular speaker in the government’s 2.0 community and has served for the past two years as one of the organizers for the Government 2.0 Camp in Los Angeles. Williams is the co-founder of the Mobile Citizen Summit and the founder of the Global Citizenship Project. She has over fifteen years of experience working for the federal government on technology and social media projects, specializing in how disruptive technologies require organizational transformation. Her work has been highlighted as a business case in Charlene Li’s book Open Leadership. 

**Aaron Sherinian** serves as the Chief Communications and Marketing Officer for the UN Foundation. He leads the Foundation’s public relations efforts, media relationships, strategic outreach, and online presence. Before joining the UN Foundation, Aaron Sherinian served as Managing Director of Public Affairs for the Millennium Challenge Corporation where he oversaw the agency’s strategic communications portfolio, media relationships, and public relations agenda. His professional background includes a decade of service as a Foreign Service Officer for the U.S. Department of State. Before returning to Washington, he was Press Attaché at the U.S. Embassy in Quito, Ecuador. He served in the Political and Consular Sections of the U.S. Embassy in Costa Rica and in the Office of Policy Planning under two Assistant Secretaries of State for the Western Hemisphere. Mr. Sherinian is a native of Pasadena, California. He holds degrees from the Johns Hopkins University (School of Advanced International Studies – SAIS) and Brigham Young University. In addition to Spanish, he speaks Italian, Armenian, and French. He and his wife have three children.

**Nancy McGuire Choi** is Senior Director of Operations at Development Gateway, responsible for the management and strategic direction of information management programs in over 30 countries, and is the Co-Executive Director of AidData, a research and innovation partnership.  Choi has extensive experience leading aid management initiatives and working with governments and donors around the world to make development finance information more transparent and actionable. Previously, Choi monitored and responded to natural disasters and humanitarian emergencies for USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance. She holds a master’s degree in foreign service from Georgetown University and a bachelor’s degree from Harvard University. 

**Richard Lui** has been an MSNBC dayside anchor since September 2010. He has anchored some of the network’s major breaking stories, including the 2011 debt-ceiling debate, the Arab Spring, and the deficit supercommittee failure. Before joining MSNBC, Lui spent five years at CNN Worldwide, leading the network’s morning political reporting throughout the 2008 presidential election and most recently with CNN Headline News as the solo anchor of the 10 a.m. hour of “Morning Express.” Lui occasionally is a guest on political talk shows The Bill Press Show and The Stephanie Miller Show. In addition to his political and journalism work, Lui spent 15 years in business working in the consulting, manufacturing, food and beverage, and environmental industries. Most recently he cofounded the first bank-centric payment system for which he holds a patent. He also worked for firms including Citibank and Mercer Management Consulting in New York. Lui has spent 25 years in community service in Africa, Asia, and the United States, volunteering for organizations like the United States Capitol Historical Society, the Asian Pacific American Institute for Congressional Studies, and APIA Vote. Lui attended the University of California at Berkeley, majoring in the political economy of industrial society, later graduating with a bachelor’s degree in rhetoric. He received his master’s degree in business administration from the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, and is enrolled at Stanford University in its program in international security.

The *[Young Transatlantic Network](http://www.gmfus.org/transatlantic-leadership-initiatives/next-generation-leaders-young-transatlantic-network)* (YTN) is a flagship initiative of GMF specifically geared toward professionals 35 years old and younger. The network is strengthening transatlantic relations by offering the next generation of leaders opportunities to engage critically on core challenges facing Europe and the United States, as well as new issues posed by the increasing geographic reach of transatlantic cooperation. YTN currently has active chapters in Brussels, Berlin, Warsaw, and Washington, DC.

*Development Gateway* delivers information solutions to the people on the front lines of international development work. Whether they are government policy makers deciding how to invest scarce resources, aid workers building schools and clinics, or citizens who want to have a voice in the development process, Development Gateway offers tools and advisory services that empower them to be more effective. We work behind the scenes to enable others to make a difference by co-creating information solutions and cultivating skills to turn information into lasting results. 

*Image credit: [NOAA/NCEI](http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/image/globalimages.html).*

