---
layout: post
author: Paige Kirby
title:  "Achieving Sustainable Development Data: Where, and How?" 
excerpt: >-
  When it comes to implementing Agenda 2030, country partners have shared two main data and digital pain points: knowing where Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) data will come from, and how to ensure this information is useful beyond reporting....
thumbnail: assets/post-images/SDGs2.jpg
thumbnail-alt: "SDG Champions"
categories: [Innovation, Open Data]
published: true
---

When it comes to implementing Agenda 2030, country partners have shared two main data and digital pain points: knowing [*where*]({% post_url 2015-09-01-whats-your-baseline %}) Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) data will come from, and *how* to ensure this information is useful [beyond reporting](http://www.ictworks.org/2016/09/23/what-is-the-true-cost-of-collecting-performance-indicator-data/).

On the first point – where *does* this SDG data come from? Interestingly, the network of development data is [a lot more interconnected]({% post_url 2016-08-09-tangled-web-we-weave %}) (and interdependent) than you might think. While UN Agencies are responsible for reporting on indicators globally, they often rely on national statistical offices and other ministries (of health, education, agriculture) as *official* country-level data sources. In addition to this network (and often in parallel), development partners, civil society, and other [*non-official*](http://devinit.org/post/common-cause-common-language-harmonising-key-concepts-in-the-data-revolution/) groups also produce relevant in-country information.

So, SDG data mostly comes from the national level – often governments, sometimes other actors. The problem? As a colleague from Paris21 said, over the past decade “we have invested in *producing* data, not in *nationally-produced* data.” As a result, national statistical offices are [often under-resourced](http://opendatawatch.com/knowledge-partnership/state-of-development-data-funding-2016/), and coordination between and amongst official and non-official data producers is lagging. [Save the Children -- Nepal](http://opennepal.net/blog/using-joined-datasets-improve-targeting-health-and-nutrition-funding-nepal) felt this lack of coordination within government, when trying to find disaggregated health statistics; [Open Schools Kenya](http://openschoolskenya.org) seeks to bridge the gap between “official” census and community-sourced education data; and monitoring and evaluation coordination between development partners and national governments [remains mixed]({% post_url 2016-04-28-donor-mande-aid-effectiveness %}).    

All official and non-official  producers encounter challenges around data quality, methodology, and timeliness. All have [valid reasons](http://juds.joinedupdata.org/lost-in-translation-why-joined-up-data-matters-at-a-national-level/) for using (or not) each other’s data. But as we’re seeking sustainable progress – progress that can be maintained by countries themselves – we need to get smarter about reducing data collection duplications, and coordinating investments and use.

With these coordination challenges – and the wealth of development-relevant data that exists – how can we turn 230 indicators into evidence-based decision-making? The answer: it’s complex. We’ve [heard from country partners]({% post_url 2016-09-06-rdi-policy-brief %}) that resources (financial and human), capacities (human and technical), and enabling environments – high-level expectations that data *should* be used to inform programming – are crucial (and often missing) to ensure information is used.

Technology is not **the** solution to sustainable development programming. However, it can help turn data into information, and information into action. Tools that support data management -- from [Excel-based toolkits]({% post_url 2016-09-22-cities-toolkit %}) to enterprise [Information Management Systems]({% post_url 2016-11-02-building-ims %}) -- can help “democratize” access to information. Technologies that can build upon existing databases, like [GIS or data visualizations]({% post_url 2016-09-19-tz-dashboards-2 %}), can help draw out insights, and bridge the “techie/non-techie” divide. Finally, these management and analysis tools can turn data into an understandable narrative for [data-driven leaders](https://www.odi.org/comment/10491-how-achieve-sdgs-2030-lessons-50-case-studies), and help citizens understand (and [demand](http://civicus.org/thedatashift/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Guide-for-engaging-governments-of-the-SDG-MA.pdf)!) policy change.

Now that we know the *how* and the *where* – what’s next? At DG, we’re working with country partners to [better coordinate and use data]({% post_url 2016-12-13-from-resources-results-rdi %}) for decision-making; we’re also building out a portfolio of tools for national and sub-national officials seeking to do more with development data. Stay tuned over the coming weeks as we continue exploring how we can push the bounds of digital and data for development. 

*Image: [United Nations Development Programme](https://www.flickr.com/photos/unitednationsdevelopmentprogramme/31548693264/in/photolist-Q4Rinj-RmiGsH-Q7CV6R-R81R1J-R81QnQ-R81PuY-dkdfgj-o4Xt7p-o4XrEg-nKFQJC-o3b9wM-o4XsFz-nKGwGc-o34cuw-nKFGtb-nKFNGw-o2Tfh4-yWwfEE-o4XsWp-o2SVHk-o4XqRx-o3ba6H-e39YyP-o34esu-dwyNqh-nKFzF2-nKGvjH-nKFRp5-o3b9Q2-nKFQLG-o34e6C-nKGuTT-o4XJZM-o3bb5B-nKFPT9-o34eHQ-o35mwu-o4Xt8g-o4XsT8-o18KLy-nKFJgj-q7x1yg-o35mPd-q7x2pK-nKGwRk-nKFQiC-nKFP3S-yVoWoJ-e3fE8C-nKFRef) [CC BY-NC-ND 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/)*
