---
layout: post
author: Development Gateway
title: "New Members Join DG Board of Directors"
excerpt: >-
  Development Gateway is pleased to announce that Lindsay Coates, Homi Kharas, Nathaniel Heller, and Mamadou Lamine Loum have joined our Board of Directors...
thumbnail: assets/post-images/dg-mark.png
thumbnail-alt: "Development Gateway"
categories: [news]
published: true
---

Development Gateway is pleased to announce that Lindsay Coates, Homi Kharas, Nathaniel Heller, and Mamadou Lamine Loum have joined our Board of Directors. 

"I am delighted to welcome Lamine, Lindsay, Homi, and Nathaniel to the Board. Their experience and dedication to the cause of transparency, good governance, and informed decision-making will guide us as we adapt to the changing world of international development. We are very lucky to have them," stated DG’s Chief Executive Officer Jean-Louis Sarbib.

**Lindsay Coates** is the President of [InterAction](https://www.interaction.org), the largest alliance of international NGOs and partners in the United States. Ms. Coates currently serves on the steering committee of the World Bank Global Partnership for Social Accountability and the executive committee for Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network (MFAN), and served on the Obama Administration's Task Force on Global Poverty, among other leadership roles. Before joining InterAction, she was the COO of Population Action International, and a practicing civil rights lawyer.

**Homi Kharas** is a Senior Fellow and Deputy Director in the Global Economy and Development program at the [Brookings Institution](https://www.brookings.edu). In that capacity, he studies policies and trends influencing developing countries, including aid to poor countries, the emergence of the middle class, and global governance and the G-20. Prior to joining Brookings, Dr. Kharas spent twenty-six years at the World Bank, serving for seven years as Chief Economist for the World Bank’s East Asia and Pacific region and Director for Poverty Reduction and Economic Management, Finance and Private Sector Development.

**Nathaniel Heller** is a Managing Director at the [Results for Development Institute (R4D)](http://www.r4d.org), which he joined in 2014, and leads R4D’s Governance Program. At R4D, Nathaniel works to harness citizen-centric transparency and accountability efforts as drivers of development outcomes. 
Prior to joining R4D, Nathaniel co-founded and led Global Integrity, a nonprofit organization that promotes government transparency and accountability worldwide. Nathaniel also co-founded the OpenGov Hub, and serves on the Open Government Partnership Civil Society Steering Committee.

**Mamadou Lamine Loum** is a leading economist and former Prime Minister of Senegal. With a public service career spanning decades, Prime Minister Loum also led the Senegalese Treasury and Finance Ministries, and was responsible for the successful debt negotiations with the “Paris Club” in the 1990s. Since 2001, he has advised governments and international organizations in a variety of domains, and from 2004-2015 represented borrowing countries at IDA replenishment negotiations. As an active Senegalese citizen, Prime Minister Loum has moderated the Assises Nationales du Sénégal and served as Vice President of the National Commissions for Institutional Reform; he also serves on a number of private-sector boards. 

“We are proud of the expertise, credibility, and accomplishments that our new Board members bring, as they join an extraordinary and distinguished Board team, comprised of Adrianus Melkert, Mary O'Kane, V.S. Subrahmanian, Rudolf Haggenmueller, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Brenda Killen, and Olivier Brochenin,” notes Nancy McGuire Choi, DG’s Chief Operating Officer. 
